Updated Unifying Applications section (#27)
greenelab/knowledge-graph-review: content/04.network_applications.md

### Unifying Applications

> Knowledge graphs have been utilized in many biomedical applications ranging from identifying protein functions [@doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2163-9] to prioritizing cancer genes [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty148] to recommending safer drugs to patients [@arxiv:1710.05980; @doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011126] (Figure {@fig:unifying_applications}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Knowledge graphs have been applied to many biomedical challenges ranging from identifying proteins' functions [@doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2163-9] to prioritizing cancer genes [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty148] to recommending safer drugs to patients [@arxiv:1710.05980; @doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011126] (Figure {@fig:unifying_applications}).
```

#### Multi-Omic Applications

Multi-omic applications employ knowledge graphs to study the genome, how genes are expressed in the transcriptome, and how the products of those transcripts interact in the proteome.
These graphs are used to establish connections between -omic entities as well as diseases.
Tasks in this context include gene-symptom prioritization [@doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy117], protein-protein interaction prediction [@doi:10.1089/cmb.2012.0273; @doi:10.1186/1752-0509-9-S1-S9], and detecting miRNA-disease associations [@doi:10.1155/2017/2498957].
We focus specifically on multi-omic applications that represent knowledge graphs in a low dimensional space to make connections.

Recommendation systems make use of knowledge graphs to establish links between RNA with disease and proteins with other proteins.
Shen et al. used an algorithm called collaborative filtering to establish an association between miRNA and diseases [@doi:10.1155/2017/2498957].

> The authors constructed an miRNA-Disease network using the HMDD database [@doi:10.1093/nar/gky1010] and generated an adjacency matrix with the rows representing miRNA and the columns representing diseases.

Reviewer: Is this acronym used without first being defined (HMDD)

High scores implied a high likelihood that a given miRNA had an association with a given disease [@doi:10.1155/2017/2498957].
Other approaches have built off of Shen et al.'s work by incorporating novel ways to perform matrix factorization [@doi:10.3390/genes10020080; @doi:10.1186/s12859-019-2956-5;@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3260-0] or by integrating machine learning models in conjunction with matrix factorization [@doi:10.1109/TCBB.2019.2937774].
These approaches achieved high AUROCs, but new discoveries have been hard to validate as experiments in this space are costly and time consuming at best [@doi:10.1155/2017/2498957].
Apart from miRNA, collaborative filtering has been used to predict protein-protein interactions [@doi:10.1109/BIBM.2010.5706537; @doi:10.1089/cmb.2012.0273; @doi:10.1186/1752-0509-9-S1-S9].
Although extensive validation of newly generated candidates may be impractical, it would be helpful to see future efforts in this space include a blinded literature search for prioritized and randomly selected candidates as part of the standard evaluation pipeline.

> Applications that use deep learning techniques have mainly focused on the node2vec model [@arxiv:1607.00653] and other variants of the model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Applications of deep learning techniques have mainly used the node2vec model [@arxiv:1607.00653] or variants of it.
```

Yang et al. used node2vec to create a recommendation system to infer associations between genes and disease symptoms [@doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy117].
The authors constructed a gene-disease symptom knowledge graph by combining two bipartite graphs: genes with diseases and diseases with disease symptoms.
The generated graph was embedded via node2vec and similarity scores were calculated for every gene-symptom pair in the graph.

> High scores implicated high likelihood for an association [@doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy117].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
High scores implied a high likelihood of an association [@doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy117].
```

This approach outperformed methods that didn't use a knowledge graph; however, validation was difficult as it involved manual curation of the literature @doi:10.1093/jamia/ocy117].

> Similar approaches used variants of the node2vec model to predict gene-disease associations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar approaches used variants of node2vec to predict gene-disease associations
```

[@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bty559; doi:10.3389/fgene.2019.00226 @doi:10.1186/s12920-019-0627-z; @doi:10.1109/BIBM47256.2019.8983134] analyze RNA-seq data [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkx750] and infer novel protein information [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx275; @doi:10.1007/978-3-030-00825-3_16; @doi:10.1016/j.artmed.2019.04.001; @doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2163-9].

> Future applications should consider incorporating more sources of data such as compounds, anatomic locations or even gene pathways to improve prediction performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Incorporating more sources of data such as compounds, anatomic locations or even gene pathways with approaches that consider different node and edge types could enable new applications.
```

Knowledge graphs benefited the multi-omics field as a resource for generating novel discoveries.
Most approaches to date use matrix factorization and node2vec to project knowledge graph into a low dimensional space, while translational models may be an untapped resource that could aid future efforts.

> Another area of exploration could be incorporating multiple sources of information such as anatomic locations or genetic pathways to improve the specificity of findings (i.e., to predict that a protein-protein interaction happens in a specific cell type or tissue).

Reviewer: This paragraph and the one above seem to end with the same rough statement (or at least sentiment). Should the sentiments in the one above be moved down here?

In this section we concentrate on applications that apply these graphs to discover new properties of drugs and focus on approaches that use these graphs in a low-dimensional space.

Similar to multi-omic applications recommendation systems have utilized knowledge graphs to infer novel links between drugs and diseases.
Dai et al. used collaborative filtering to infer drug-disease associations [@doi:10.1155/2015/275045].
The authors constructed a drug-disease network by integrating two bipartite networks: a drug-gene interaction network and a disease-gene interaction network.
They integrated both networks under the assumption that drugs associated with a disease interact with the same gene of interest. 
Following construction, the authors generated an adjacency matrix where rows represent drugs and columns represent diseases.
This matrix was decomposed into two small rectangular matrices and these matrices were used to calculate similarity scores between all drugs and all diseases.

> High values implicate a high chance of an association [@doi:10.1155/2015/275045].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
High values implied a high chance of an association [@doi:10.1155/2015/275045].
```

Zong et al. used a node2vec-like model to predict drug-target associations [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx160].
The authors constructed a disease-target-disease network using drug centered databases: Drugbank [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkm958] and Diseasome [@doi:10.1073/pnas.0701361104].
Next, the authors applied a random walk to the graph and trained a skip-gram model to generate a low dimensional representation of the graph.
Lastly, the authors construct a similarity metric that used this space to rank how similar drugs are to their targets [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx160].
A limitation to this approach is that their graph is missing information such as pharmacological class or drug chemical structure that could improve prediction performance.
Overall, deep learning provides a robust set of techniques that have been shown to outperform most linear approaches in this context [@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3284-5; @doi:10.1145/3307339.3342161].

Applications that discover new properties of drugs have benefited from using knowledge graphs as a resource.
Most methods to date use matrix factorization and deep learning techniques to produce a low-dimensional representation.

> Due to the success of deep learning [@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3284-5; @doi:10.1145/3307339.3342161] majority of the field's focus has shifted to these techniques; however, a possible extension is to use an ensemble of deep learning techniques and linear methods to improve performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the success of deep learning [@doi:10.1186/s12859-019-3284-5; @doi:10.1145/3307339.3342161] much of the field's focus has shifted to these techniques; however, a possible extension is to use an ensemble of deep learning techniques and linear methods to improve performance.
```

In contrast with most applications where node2vec and autoencoder models have become established, deep learning methods in this field have focused on using graph attention models [@arxiv:1706.03762].
These models mimic machine translation models [@arxiv:1409.0473] and aim to simultaneously represent knowledge graphs in a low dimensional space and perform the task at hand.
Choi et al. used a graph attention model to predict patient diagnoses [@arxiv:1611.07012].
The authors constructed a directed graph using medical concepts from patient EHR data.
This directed graph was fed into a graph attention network and then used to predict a patient's likelihood of heart failure [@arxiv:1611.07012].
Other approaches have used graph attention models to perform clinical tasks such as drug safety recommendations [@doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011126] and patient diagnoses [@arxiv:1906.04716].

Knowledge graphs have shown promising results when used for clinical applications; however, there is still room for improvement.
Most approaches have run into the common problem of missing data within EHR [@arxiv:1611.07012; @arxiv:1710.05980; @doi:10.1609/aaai.v33i01.33011126].

> Future directions for field consist of designing algorithms that can fill in this missing data gap or construct models that can take missing data into account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Future directions for the field consist of designing algorithms that can fill in this missing data gap or construct models that can take missing data into account.
```
